# Types of Opamps

An opamp is built using a lot of internal components such as transistors. When it comes to just using opamps, we don't generally need to know the details around what's inside the opamp package.

However, it's good to know that there are three main ways an opamp can be constructed:
* JFET transistor based
* BJT transistor based
* MOSFET transistor based (known as CMOS)


</br></br>
## JFET Opamps
Common JFET opamps include the TL06x series, the TL07x series, and the TL08x series.


</br></br>
### Advantages

The biggest advantage of a JFET opamp is its **high input impedance**. This makes them particularly useful for applications like buffers, where we expect a high impedance input.

JFETs are **low noise**. This is random fluctuations in voltage or current that happen within the transistor. JFET opamps are good in certain audio applications for this reason.

They have a **wide bandwidth**. The bandwidth is the range of frequencies that the opamp can reliably support.

Typically, they also have a very low **input bias current**. We generally think of opamp terminals as not passing any current at all, but that's just conceptual. They have to pass _some_ current. JFET opamps require a very low current on these pins to operate.


</br></br>
### Disadvantages

A JFET opamp has a higher **offset voltage** than other types. In an ideal opamp, if the input voltages are zero, the output will be zero. In practice though, there is an _offset voltage_, which is a slight difference in DC voltage between the two input terminals.

They also have a larger **offset drift**. This is a slight variation in the output voltage over time.

JFET opamps may also require a higher **supply voltage** to operate.


</br></br>
## BJT Opamps
Common BJT opamps include the LM741, the LM384, and the RC4558.


</br></br>
### Advantages

BJT opamps are all about **high gain**, which is useful if a large amplification is needed.

Like JFET opamps, they have a **high bandwidth**, making them suitable for cases where a range of frequencies are involved.

They have lower **offset voltage** and better **offset drift** than JFET opamps.


</br></br>
### Disadvantages

They have a low **input impedance**, making them less suitable for interfacing with high impedance sources, such as electric guitar pickups.

They also have higher **bias input current**, and a more limited **bandwidth** than JFETs.


</br></br>
## CMOS Opamps
### Advantages

CMOS opamps usually have very low **power consumption**, which can be useful for battery powered circuits.

Like JFETs, CMOS opamps have a high **input impedance**, meaning they can interface with guitar pickups. They are also **low noise**.


</br></br>
### Disadvantages

CMOS opamps have a lower **gain** than BJT opamps, and a much more limited **bandwidth** than BJT or JFET opamps.

Their **offset voltage** is also higher, which may require extra circuitry to compensate for.


</br></br>
# Other Characteristics
## Rail to Rail

CMOS opamps are typically _rail to rail_ opamps on input, output, or both. This means they can operate all the way to their advertised input or output voltages.

JFET and BJT opamps aren't typically rail to rail. This means it's easier to get clipping from these opamps, which may be useful in distortion circuits.

In a single power supply case, such as when an opamp has +9v on the positive rail and 0v on the negative, this can have an interesting result. JFET opamps such as the TL07x series, usually can't output all the way down to the lower rail. This means their output can _swing_ between +1v and +9v.


## Slew Rate

The **slew rate** is how fast the voltage can change over time. This is expressed as **V/µs**. Think of an AC audio signal that is oscillating up and down. The opamp needs to have a slew rate that is fast enough to change the output voltage to represent the signal.

JFET based opamps typically have a higher slew rate. The TL07x is about **13V/µs**, making it good for audio applications.

The LM358, which is BJT based, has a slew rate of about 0.3V/µs, which is much slower. This can create noticable distortion in audio signals.

The TLV2372, a CMOS opamp, has a slew rate of about 1.3V/µs. Better than the BJT for audio, but nowhere close to the JFET.


</br></br>
## Phase Reversal


