# Anti Aliasing

**Anti Aliasing** is a term that comes up in many different fields, including audio. Really, it's important to any type of signal processing, whether audio, video, or something else.


</br></br>
# What is Aliasing?

Aliasing is a side effect that we sometimes get when processing a digital signal.

Have you ever watched TV and seen a helicopter's rotor blades spinning, but it almost looks like they are staying still? Or a car's wheels that look like they're still or maybe even spinning backward slowly? These are examples of aliasing.

Aliasing occurs when a signal is being sampled at a rate at which we can't observe oscillation.

For example, think of a video camera filming a spinning wheel. The video camera will record a number of pictures each second. This is the sample rate. Now imagine that the wheel is turning at a speed so it has turned one full revolution every time the video camera captures an image. The result is, we don't get to see the wheel turn, so it appears to be still.

Now imagine that we're capturing a simple audio signal. If the wave's frequency is the same as the sample rate, what will happen? The wave will not appear to be oscillating. Once converted to digital, each sample will be the same value, and we won't have captured anything useful about that signal.

In some cases this isn't a big deal. Who cares if a wheel looks like it's spinning when you're watching a car chase in some action movie?

In other cases, like in audio applications, this can have a far bigger effect. So how can we work around this?

One method is to make sure the sampling rate is always at least twice the frequency that's being converted. That's why it's common to record audio at around 48KHz sampling rate. The frequencies we hear go up to about 20KHz, so we double that to 40KHz, and add a bit more.

That won't solve all problems though. The next option is an **anti-aliasing filter**.

