# Arduino ADC

The arduino can be very useful in effects pedals (and electronics in general), as it can take an analogue signal, and tell you something about it, or apply some effect digitally.

Of course, the key part of this we need is its ADC, as it will only work with digital signals.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This article assumes the ATMEGA328 architecture (eg, Uno, Nano, etc). Implementation details will vary on other models.


</br></br>
## Ardunio ADC

The Arduino Uno has six onboard ADC channels. These are the analogue inputs A0 - A5.

These channels expect an input between 0v and +5v. This can be changed using the **analogReference()** function, but the options here are limited.

Each channel has a 10-bit resolution, meaning that input voltages are represented as values from 0 to 1023 (where 0v is 0, and 5v is 1023). The **analogRead()** function reads the voltage on the analog pin, and returns a value from 0 - 1023.


</br></br>
## Interrupts

Normally, Arduino code runs within the main **loop()**. For many things this is fine, but for audio applications it causes a problem. The code within the loop affects how long each loop takes to run. This makes it difficult to perform tasks on very regular intervals. We need regular intervals, for example, when sampling an input signal.

Fortunately, the arduino, like many microcontrollers and computers, contain _interrupts_. To oversimplify a bit, a interrupt is a signal sent to the microcontroller to tell it to run a specific block of code, regardless of where it's up to in the main loop.

Effectively, it _interrupts_ the loop execution to run some critical code, and then allows the loop to continue where it left off.

Broadly speaking, we might use interrupts in two possible ways:
* To handle a critical event as soon as it happens
* To run some code on a regular interval

As you can see, for audio signals, interrupts are critical for sampling.

</br></br>
> [!NOTE]
> See this article for more information:
> https://www.instructables.com/Arduino-Timer-Interrupts/


</br></br>
## Timers

The Ardunino has three timers, named timer0, timer1, and timer2. These timers contain a counter, which is just a number that the microcontroller keeps track of.

The Ardunio also has an internal clock, which operates at 16MHz. That means the clock _ticks_ 6-million times every second. Every time the clock ticks, each of the value in each of these timers are incremented by 1. This means these timers count up very very quickly.

Timer0 and 2 are 8-bit timers, meaning they can count from 0 to 255. Timer1 is 16-bit, counting from 0 to 65535. When the timer is 'full', the next tick resets the clock, and it starts back at zero.

How does this relate to interrupts? We can cause an interrupt to _fire_ based on these timers. For example, we can say, 'run this code whenever Timer0 resets to zero.

As the clocks tick 16 million times every second, these timers fill and reset multiple times a second. This is often not too useful, as interrupts will be firing many times per second (probably too many). Fortunately, we can configure how the timers work.


</br></br>
## Prescalers

A **prescaler** configures how fast the timers increment. They don't change the clock speed, that's fixed at 16MHz. What they change is how many clock ticks are required to increment the value in the timer.

The prescaler is just an integer, a whole number. By default it's set to 1, which means the counters increment with every clock tick. If the prescaler were set to 8, the counters would increment by one every eight clock ticks. We can express this as a formula:

```math
Timer = {Clock Speed \over Prescaler}
```

</br></br>
Here, 'Timer' is the timer speed in Hz. This tells us that the higher the prescaler value, the slower the timers will increment.

There is a catch however. We can't set the prescaler to just any value we want. We can select from these values:
* 1
* 8
* 64
* 256
* 1024

So to summarise it all up at this point, we can have interrupts (special blocks of code) 'firing' at regaulr intervals. We can set this interval based on the _prescaler_ value.


</br></br>
## Registers

A register is a very small amount of memory on a CPU or microcontroller. It's like a variable that exists in hardware. They can be used to store a small piece of information while executing a command, or to apply some setting.

The ATMega328P microcontroller, the heart of many Ardunios, has several registers that we can manipulate directly to set how the timers and interrupts work.

Here is a summary of the registers that we will find useful. Please note that whenever you see a '0', it refers to Timer0. Replace with a 1 or 2 for Timer1 or Timer2.


| Register | Size  | Name                             | Description                                                  |
| -------- | ----- | -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| TCNT0    | 8-bit | Timer/Counter value              | The value of the timer (16-bit for TCNT1)                    |
| TCCR0A   | 8-bit | Timer/Counter Control Register A | Timer configuration                                          |
| TCCR0B   | 8-bit | Timer/Counter Control Register B | Timer configuration                                          |
| OCR0A    | 8-bit | Output compare register A        | Timer is compared to this to see if an interrupt should fire |
| TIMSK0   | 8-bit | Timer Interrupt Mask register    | Enable interrupts based on the timer                         |


</br></br>
> [!NOTE]
> A great deal of information can be found in the ATMega328P datasheet:
> https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/Atmel-7810-Automotive-Microcontrollers-ATmega328P_Datasheet.pdf


</br></br>
### Timer Value

The **TCNT0** register is the timer value itself. This is the value that is incremented at regular intervals.

</br></br>
### Timer Configuration

**TCCR0A** and **TCCR0B** are used to configure the timer. We can set and clear individual bits in these registers to apply the settings we want, such as the prescaler value.

The lower three bits in **TCCR0B** (called CS00, CS01, and CS02) control the prescaler value.

| CS02 | CS01 | CS00 | Prescaler |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | --------- |
| 0    | 0    | 0    | Off       |
| 0    | 0    | 1    | 1         |
| 0    | 1    | 0    | 8         |
| 0    | 1    | 1    | 64        |
| 1    | 0    | 0    | 256       |
| 1    | 0    | 1    | 1024      |


</br></br>
### Timer Mode

The **WGM** bits (WGM00, WGM01, and WGM02) control the timer mode. WGM02 is part of **TCCR0B**, while WGM00 and WGM01 are part of **TCCR0A**.

| WGM02 | WGM01 | WGM00 | Mode                           |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ------------------------------ |
| 0     | 0     | 0     | Up to 0xFF                     |
| 0     | 1     | 0     | Up to value in **OCR0A**       |
| 0     | 1     | 1     | Up to 0xFF, PWM mode           |
| 1     | 1     | 1     | Up to **OCR0A**, PWM Mode      |
| 0     | 0     | 1     | Up to 0xFF, Down to 0x00, PWM  |
| 1     | 0     | 1     | Up to OCR0A, Down to 0x00, PWM |


</br></br>
### Comparison Value

We can set a value in the **OCR0A** register that the timer will be compared to. For example, if the OCR0A register is set to 10, the timer will increment regularly and when it reaches 10, the interrupt will fire.

To have a simple timer that we've been dicussing so far, we want the timer mode to count up to the value in **OCR0A**, and then fire the interrupt.


</br></br>
### Enabling Interrupts

There are three bits used in the **TIMSK01** register that affect how timers fire interrupts. For what we're doing, bit 1 (called **OCIE0A**) is the important bit. Setting this means we're enabling the timers and interrupts for the settings we have defined.


</br></br>
## Sample Code
### Timer Setup

This example sets up timer0 to run at 2KHz. This is all done in the Arduino's **setup()** function.

> [!NOTE]
> Interrupts are disabled with **cli()** while registers are accessed, and reenabled with **sei()** when setup is done.

    void setup(){
        cli();
    
        // Set the initial values of TCCR0A and TCCR0B to zero
        TCCR0A = 0;
        TCCR0B = 0;

        // Initialise the counter to zero
        TCNT0  = 0;
        
        // Set compare match register for 2khz
        // We will use a prescaler of 64, so OCR0A needs to be (16MHz / (2000Hz * 64) - 1)
        // These values are chosen to get this value below 255, as Timer0 is 8-bit
        OCR0A = 124
        
        // Set CTC mode (count up to the value in OCR0A)
        TCCR0A |= (1 << WGM01);
        
        // Set prescaler of 64 (CS01 and CS00 bits)
        TCCR0B |= (1 << CS01) | (1 << CS00);   
        
        // Enable timer compare interrupt
        TIMSK0 |= (1 << OCIE0A);
        
        sei();
    }


### Interrupts

Let's set an interrupt to turn on/off the Built in LED (pin 13).

In addition to the timer setup code above, we will need:

    // Flag to toggle LED
    boolean toggle0 = 0

    void setup(){
        // Setup pin 13 as output
        pinMode(13, OUTPUT);

        // Timer code goes here
    }

</br></br>
We put the interrupt code in a special **ISR** function. We pass the special **TIMER0_COMPA_vect** variable to this function to tell the microcontroller that this interrupt should fire based on the condition of Timer0 (which we configured previously).

    ISR(TIMER0_COMPA_vect) {
        // Check the toggle0 flag
        // Turn the LED on/off accordingly
        if (toggle0) {
            digitalWrite(13,HIGH);
            toggle0 = 0;
        }
        else {
            digitalWrite(13,LOW);
            toggle0 = 1;
        }
    }   






